Update Factory PKI docs according to recent changes (#699)
foundriesio/docs: source/user-guide/device-gateway-pki/device-gateway-pki.rst

It also provides examples to configure your Factory PKI using the :ref:`Fioctl® <ref-fioctl>` commands.

This user guide focuses more on the Factory PKI internals.
That should allow you to integrate with the Factory PKI API directly if you need to.

Fioctl uses the `Golang native cryptographic libraries <https://pkg.go.dev/crypto>`_ to implement all PKI related commands.
However, the same cryptographic functions can be implemented using `OpenSSL <https://www.openssl.org/>`_, as demonstrated in this guide.

.. warning::
   The Factory :ref:`Root of Trust <Root-of-Trust>` **can only be set once**; subsequent attempts will fail.
   Other Factory PKI certificates can be updated at any time; having that you own your Factory Root of Trust.

   `Contact customer support <https://support.foundries.io>` if you need your Factory PKI being reset.
   Once a reset was performed, all connected devices will lose their connection.
   These devices will not be able to connect to the device gateway until they are re-provisioned with a new Root of Trust.
   On practice that usually means that these devices need to be re-flashed (after the Factory PKI reset).

> Taking Ownership of Factory PKI Using the API

Reviewer: I think one or more of us should go through these commands and see if they work for him/her.

Author: IIRC I tested these commands before adding to the doc.
Nevertheless, it would be nice is somebody (not me) tries them and provides feedback.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before setting up your Factory PKI, your Devices and Device Gateway talk to each other by utilizing a so-called "shared PKI".
This is the default PKI that FoundriesFactory® sets up as part of provisioning a new Factory.

> You can always check your Factory PKI settings using the ``fioctl keys ca show``.

Author: Maybe you are right.
Just ATM I am out of context for this PR and limited in time.
...Preferring to leave that task to the next iteration of improvements.

> In case of a shared PKI that command would tell you that your factory PKI is not configured yet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case of a "shared" PKI that command would tell you that your Factory PKI is not configured yet.
```

Author: Fixed

First, a command calls the API to initialize a Factory PKI, which performs the following actions:

- Verify if the Factory PKI was already initialized, and fail if a user attempts to initialize an already initialized PKI.
- Generates a server-side crypto-key for the ref:`tls-crt` and returns a Certificate Signing Request (CSR) for it.
- Optionally generates a server-side crypto-key for the ref:`online-ca` and returns a CSR for it.
- Optionally generates a server-side crypto-key for the ref:`est-tls-crt` and returns a CSR for it.

Once the ``fioctl keys ca create`` command receives a response, it performs the following actions:

    - Generates the Factory Root CA on either your local file system or an HSM device.
    - Optionally generates a Local Device CA on your local file system, and signs it using the Factory Root CA.
    - Signs all CSRs received from the above API call.
    - Finally, that command uploads all generated certificates to the API; private keys are not uploaded.

You can replay what the ``fioctl keys ca create`` command does using the following steps.

1. Call the API to Generate CSRs
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> You may use `Curl <https://curl.se/>`_ to contact Factory PKI APIs.

Reviewer: Just IMO, the verb `contact` sounds a bit weird in this context.

Author: Agreed and used verbs _play with_ and _call_.

The following command contacts the API to generate CSRs for the server TLS certificate and the Online Device CA::

    curl "https://api.foundries.io/ota/factories/${FACTORY}/certs/" \
        -s -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -H "OSF-Token: $TOKEN" \
        -d '{"first-time-init": true, "tls-csr": true, "ca-csr": true, "est-tls-csr": false}'

The above API returns the following output in case of success::

    {
        "ca-csr": "(Optionally) A CSR for online Device CA of your Factory in PEM format."
        "tls-csr": "A CSR for device APIs server TLS certificate of your Factory in PEM format".
        "est-tls-csr": "(Optionally) A CSR for (Foundries.io hosted) EST server TLS certificate of your Factory in PEM format".
    }

You need to store all received CSRs on your local file system to be able to use OpenSSL to generate corresponding certificates.

> 2. Generate a Private Key and Certificate for Root Factory CA

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Generate a Private Key and Certificate for Factory Root CA
```

Author: Fixed

'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

You may use OpenSSL to generate your Factory Root CA.

First, you need to create the following certificate configuration file on your file system::

    factory_ca.cnf:
        [req]
        prompt = no
        distinguished_name = dn
        x509_extensions = ext

        [dn]
        CN = Factory-CA
        OU = <your-factory-name>

        [ext]
        basicConstraints=CA:TRUE
        keyUsage = keyCertSign, cRLSign
        extendedKeyUsage = critical, clientAuth, serverAuth

.. important::

>     It is important that the Organization Unit of your Factory Root CA Subject field is set to your Factory name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    It is important that the Organization Unit  (OU) of your Factory Root CA Subject field is set to your Factory name.
```

Author: Makes sense.

>     That information is used by the API to validate that you upload a Root CA for a correct Factory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    That information is used by the API to validate that you upload a Root CA for the correct Factory.
```

Author: Not sure, but IMHO in this case `a correct` is a more correct use: https://textranch.com/c/a-correct-or-the-correct/

Next, use the following OpenSSL command to generate the private key for your Factory Root CA::

    openssl ecparam -genkey -name prime256v1 | openssl ec -out factory_ca.key

The above command stores the private key in a ``factory_ca.key`` file on your local file system.
If you want to store in on an HSM device,
look at the `Fioctl Bash based PKI implementation <https://github.com/foundriesio/fioctl/blob/main/x509/bash.go>`_ for an example.

Once you have a configuration and private key files, use the following OpenSSL command to generate the Factory Root CA::

    openssl req -new -x509 -days 7300 -sha256 -config factory_ca.cnf -key factory_ca.key -out factory_ca.pem

The above command stores your Factory Root CA certificate in a ``factory_ca.pem`` file on your local file system.
In this example, the Factory Root CA is self-signed by its own private key.
Alternatively, you may sign it by a higher level CA at your disposal.

3. Optionally Generate Your Local Device CA
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> Although Foundries.io™ securely stores your Factory Online Device CA; its private key is not owned by you.

Reviewer 2: if it's not mine, who owns the private key?

Reviewer: I guess Volodya meant `; the private key is owned by you`.

Author: I meant what is there - _NOT owned by you_. This is the essence of the Online Device CA. And this is the primary reason for the below recommendation.

We recommended generating one or more Local Device CA for your Factory before going to production.
Those Local Device CAs should be used to issue client TLS certificates for your production devices.
In a fully sealed setup you would disable or revoke the Online Device CA for your Factory.

Similarly to the Factory Root CA, you may use OpenSSL to generate your Local Device CA.

First, you need to create the following certificate configuration files on your file system::

    local_ca.cnf
        [req]
        prompt = no
        distinguished_name = dn

        [dn]
        CN = fio-<your-user-uid>
        OU = <your-factory-name>

>     ca.ext:

Reviewer: I think it should be `[ext]`.

Reviewer: Or, it is the file `ca.ext`, then I would distinguish/separate these two files more clearly.

Author: It is a separate file - that should be evident from indentation and the above sentence referring to _configuration fileS_.

        keyUsage=critical, keyCertSign
        basicConstraints=critical, CA:TRUE, pathlen:0

.. important::
    It is important that the Organization Unit of your Factory Device CA Subject field is set to your Factory name.
    That information is used by the API to validate that you upload a Root CA for a correct Factory.

>     Additionally, the Common Name of your Factory Local Device CA Subject field needs to equal "fio-" plus your user ID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Additionally, the Common Name (CN) of your Factory Local Device CA Subject field needs to equal "fio-" plus your user ID.
```

Author: Ok

Then, generate a CSR for your Local Device CA using the following OpenSSL command::

    openssl req -new -config local_ca.cnf -key local_ca.key -out local_ca.csr

Finally, use OpenSSL to generate your Factory Local Device CA, and sign it by your Factory Root CA::

    openssl x509 -req -days 3650 -sha256 -CAcreateserial -in local_ca.csr \
        -extfile ca.ext -CAkey factory_ca.key -CA factory_ca.pem -out local_ca.pem

These commands will store your Factory Local Device CA private key and certificate in ``local_ca.key`` and ``local_ca.pem`` files.

4. Sign CSRs Received from the API
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

You may use OpenSSL to sign API provided CSRs for your Factory, similarly to how the Factory Local Device CA is signed.

First, you need to create the following certificate configuration files on your file system::

    server.ext
        keyUsage=critical, digitalSignature
        extendedKeyUsage=critical, serverAuth

    ca.ext:
        keyUsage=critical, keyCertSign
        basicConstraints=critical, CA:TRUE, pathlen:0

Next, use OpenSSL to determine the DNS names from the server TLS CSR, and append it to the server configuration file::

>     echo "subjectAltName=$(openssl req -text -noout -verify -in tls.csr | grep DNS:)" >> server.ext

Reviewer: The doc doesn't provides details on the `tls.csr`. Maybe it should be stated explicitly that this file should be generated by extracting the `"tls-csr"` from the response received from the server on the initial request?

Author: Good catch!
Added a sentence about that in step 1.

Finally, use OpenSSL to generate the server TLS certificate, and sign it by your Factory Root CA::

    openssl x509 -req -days 3650 -sha256 -CAcreateserial -in tls.csr \
        -extfile server.ext -CAkey factory_ca.key -CA factory_ca.pem -out tls.pem

Similarly, you may generate and sign a server TLS certificate for Foundries.io hosted EST server if you need it.

If you also want to have a Factory Online Device CA, generate and sign using the following OpenSSL command::

>     openssl x509 -req -days 3650 -sha256 -CAcreateserial -in online_ca.csr \

Reviewer: The same about `online_ca.csr`, the doc doesn't provide details how to generate it.

Author: Thanks! Covered in the previous comment.

        -extfile ca.ext -CAkey factory_ca.key -CA factory_ca.pem -out online_ca.pem

5. Upload Generated Certificates to the API
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Once you have generated all the necessary certificates, you may upload them to the Factory PKI API.

You might have generated more than one Device CA (for example both Local and Online Device CAs, or several Local Device CAs).

> In this case you need to contatenate them into a single file before the upload, e.g. using this command::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, you need to concatenate them into a single file before the upload, e.g., using this command::
```

Author: Ok

    cat online_ca.pem local_ca.pem >> device_ca_list.pem

Your Factory PKI certificates may be uploaded to the API using this Curl command::

    ROOT_CA_CRT=$(cat factory_ca.pem | awk -v ORS='\\n' '1') \

>     DEVICE_CA_CRT=$(cat device_ca_list_ca.pem | awk -v ORS='\\n' '1') \

Reviewer: ``DEVICE_CA_CRT=$(cat device_ca_list.pem | awk -v ORS='\\n' '1') \``

Author: Fixed

    TLS_CRT=$(cat tls.pem | awk -v ORS='\\n' '1') \
    curl "https://api.foundries.io/ota/factories/${FACTORY}/certs/" \
        -s -X PATCH -H "Content-Type: application/json" -H "OSF-Token: $TOKEN" \
        -d '{"root-crt": "'"${ROOT_CA_CRT}"'", "tls-crt": "'"${TLS_CRT}"'", "ca-crt": "'"${DEVICE_CA_CRT}"'"}'

After this command your Factory PKI is ready to use.

Registering Factory Devices Using the API
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Devices are usually registered with your Factory by running the
`lmp-device-register® <https://github.com/foundriesio/lmp-device-register/>`_ tool.
See the :ref:`getting started guide <gs-register>` for more details on using the tool.

This same task may be accomplished by generating the device client certificate using OpenSSL, and uploading it to the API.
The device may be registered via the FoundriesFactory API or the your own registration service
(e.g. a `factory-registration-ref® <https://github.com/foundriesio/factory-registration-ref>`_).

> You can replay what the ``lmp-device-register`` and ``factory-registration-reg`` tools do using the following steps using OpenSSL.

Reviewer 2: replay? mimic? miror?

to try to avoid that tricky word:

```suggestion
the following steps use OpenSSL to do the same thing as ``lmp-device-register`` and ``factory-registration-reg``.
```

Author: Accepted and amended.

First, you need to create the following certificate configuration files on your file system::

    client.cnf
        [req]
        prompt = no
        distinguished_name = dn

        [dn]
        CN = <your-device-uuid>
        OU = <your-factory-name>

    client.ext:
        keyUsage=critical, digitalSignature
        basicConstraints=critical, clientAuth

> Next, use the following OpenSSL command to generate the private key for your device client certificate::

Reviewer: Maybe just `device certificate` instead of `device client certificate`?

    openssl ecparam -genkey -name prime256v1 | openssl ec -out client.key

Then, generate a CSR for your device client certificate using the following OpenSSL command::

    openssl req -new -config client.cnf -key client.key -out client.csr

Finally, use OpenSSL to generate your device client certificate, and sign it by your Factory Local Device CA::

    openssl x509 -req -days 3650 -sha256 -CAcreateserial -in client.csr \
        -extfile ca.ext -CAkey local_ca.key -CA local_ca.pem -out client.pem

At this point, the device should be ready to connect to your Factory device gateway to fetch updates.
Optionally, you might register your device with the API using this Curl command::

    DEVICE_CRT=$(cat client.pem | awk -v ORS='\\n' '1') \
    curl "https://api.foundries.io/ota/devices/" \
        -s -X PUT -H "Content-Type: application/json" -H "OSF-Token: $TOKEN" \
        -d '{"client.pem": "'"${DEVICE_CRT}"'", "name": "<optional-device-name>"}'

You may run the following commands to verify that your device can connect to your Factory device gateway::

    # Run this command first to see the device gateway host name:

>     openssl x509 -noout -in tls.pem -ext subjectAltName

Author: The user is only interested in the `<device-gateway-ID>` but I admit that this sentence does not hint how to obtain it.
I tried to improve - let me know how if it helps.

    # Then, use substitute the <device-gateway-ID> in the below command with your findings.
    curl --cacert factory_ca.pem --cert client.pem --key client.key https://<device-gateway-ID>.ota-lite.foundries.io:8443/repo/1.root.json | jq

> If you did not register your device with the API, it will be auto-registered on the first call to the device gateway.

Reviewer 3: I'm just a bit confused on why we have such explanation with openssl commands in the user guide section, maybe @kprosise can comment as well.

I would expect more technical documentation to be in reference manual and more user friendly/usage focused in user guide. As a customer support person, I prefer customers using our fioctl commands that should work out of the box in most situations rather than using steps that can cause us more pain, but maybe this comes from someone who doesn't have enough context in this topic.

Taking Ownership of Factory PKI Using the API
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before setting up your Factory PKI, your Devices and Device Gateway talk to each other by utilizing a so-called "shared PKI".
This is the default PKI that FoundriesFactory® sets up as part of provisioning a new Factory.

You can always check your Factory PKI settings using the ``fioctl keys ca show``.
In case of a shared PKI that command would tell you that your Factory PKI is not configured yet.

In order to take ownership of your Factory PKI, run a ``fioctl keys ca create`` command.
This command communicates with the FoundriesFactory API to create and update Factory specific PKI keys and certificates.

First, a command calls the API to initialize a Factory PKI, which performs the following actions:

- Verify if the Factory PKI was already initialized, and fail if a user attempts to initialize an already initialized PKI.
- Generates a server-side crypto-key for the ref:`tls-crt` and returns a Certificate Signing Request (CSR) for it.
- Optionally generates a server-side crypto-key for the ref:`online-ca` and returns a CSR for it.

> - Optionally generates a server-side crypto-key for the ref:`est-tls-crt` and returns a CSR for it.

Reviewer 4: `ref:` -> `:ref:` they are just missing colons in front. Working on a patch for this commit right now.
